Well, welcome to this month's Ask Your Herb Doctor. My name is Andrew Murray
From 730 and to 8 o'clock the end of the show we do a live. I do a live call-in
I say we because Dr. Raymond Peat
Always joins us and has done for several years now
The number of you on the reaches I'd love to hear from you about either tonight's subjects continuing topic of serotonin
inflammation
superoxide oxidants antioxidants
And several other subjects, but the number is seven zero seven nine two three three nine one one
For those of you who perhaps have never heard dr. Peat
Will be giving out his details at the end of the show and for those of you who know a
Lot about him and listen to lots of what he's got to say and read his books
I'm sure you'll find this evening show just as informative
It's a once a month show that we do from 7 to 8 p.m. And from 730
Until 8 o'clock we do a live call-in so
If people want to call in with questions related or unrelated to this month's subject on continuing topic of inflammation serotonin
Etc numbers seven zero seven nine two three three nine one one so from 730 on
And if people want to line up ahead of time before that that's just fine too because that also happens
So once again very pleased to welcome introduce dr. Raymond Peat onto the show dr. Peat you with us. Yes, okay
Thanks so much for giving your time again as you always do every third Friday the month for us
For those people that perhaps have never heard you or heard your name heard you speak or know anything about you perhaps. Would you just
Outline your professional and academic background and then we'll get into tonight's topic
okay, I
got a master's degree with a
thesis on William Blake from University of Oregon
1960 and then
taught
various
schools and colleges
and in
1968 I went back for a PhD in biology University of Oregon
graduating in 72 and
I've been following up on
Pretty much the same interests
ever since the 50s
Studying how the brain and body work
Okay, thank you. I was going to ask I wanted to ask I didn't didn't prepare this ahead of time
But when when did you stop seeing people in person because you used to consult with people right?
um, yeah, but
1990 I think it was yeah
Okay. All right
Well, I just wanted to let people know also that's something I should have done at the very beginning of the show because I often find
Myself wondering what month it was the show was done in
It's November. So November the 15th
the doctor Peat
Carrying on from where we left off last month
Talking about or discussing parts of your newsletter
But and a small part of it because we didn't get a lot of time to to cover it. Excuse me, but I had
some more questions in about
Tryptophan and serotonin and given that serotonin is formed from this amino acid tryptophan
If we are to if we're to avoid this like because the whole the whole ages of this is that
Serotonin is an inflammatory molecule
It's responsible for many negative effects in the body and obviously we'll get you to outline all of those things in detail here
So people can understand just how?
You know just how bad it is for you and its negative effects and why?
The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors are so bad for you given that they allow this
product to remain
in larger concentrations in the body
How best how best can we avoid?
tryptophan
ingestion
In order to try and get an edge on the serotonin that would be formed from it
Tryptophan and
Metabolites including serotonin is
Essential for life
every kind of
organism is built with proteins containing
tryptophan and
The very nature of life as I see it and as Albert St. Georgie
Researched it
he for the last
30 40 years of his life
Was demonstrating the electronic nature of life?
the
fluorescence luminescence
electronic conductivity in such of
living systems at the proteins
interacting with water
Producing excited electrons and of light emissions and
Tryptophan is the amino acid that gives proteins that basic property that
according to St. Georgie
It is the the essential
Mechanism of life that lets it
Sense and move he was a muscle researcher
among other things and
this electronic property
Is at the heart of both sensation and movement and all of the other?
familiar properties of life
nutrition consciousness and so on
so it's a
When when something goes wrong with tryptophan or its metabolites it disturbs life at its
deepest level
cell division and all other functions
depend on this excitability of tryptophan and
The in the muscle protein myosin for example
There's one particular
tryptophan which is most sensitive
electronically and
To light interactions such as phosphorescence
and this
tryptophan interacts electrically or electronically with cysteine
which is an oxidizable sulfur protein and
these are the
sort of the electric motor of
all the life processes
and
They happen to be the
essential things during the growth
process of an organism, but
If you keep the same ratio
coming in in your diet
and
stop growing
They're no longer being
Consumed in proportion for growth and so they become
sort of free actors which can spread
excitability and oxidized ability
randomly in the organism so during the growth period of an organism
You need the full balanced range of amino acids
but when when your body growth stops all you need to maintain
The renewal of your skin and
Intestine lining lungs
All of the turnover of brain proteins that are being renewed and so on
That's a very small amount of growth that's going on
compared to
in your
infancy and teens
Those those amino acids are are now at risk of becoming
Random excitatory
inflammation promoting processes and
it happens that
gelatin is a
major protein that is used for building frameworks connective tissues and
it has a
complete lack of
these excitable proteins cysteine
thiamine and tryptophan and
so if it becomes a major
dietary protein when growth is completed
then you reduce the
the risk of
the inflammatory and degenerative diseases
Do you think this could be mitigated through I mean I know you don't at all
promote any
aerobic exercise or
stress inducing exercise
But given that I've come from a kind of not I am but I come from a kind of bodybuilding perspective
Where you do recommend
lightweight bearing exercise for people of all ages and actually
very much
Support is used for producing muscle mass muscle burning glucose
being thyroid thyroid
stimulatory and supportive
If these amino acids are being consumed and somebody's actually doing some work then
Does that would that warrant that diet remain in that way because obviously there's an ideal
in life and you've mentioned the gelatin and it being
completely
absent from these inflammatory amino acids, but in terms of a balanced diet that would contain some of these
Would you recognize work?
doing work by lifting small weights and
Exercising your body is
Yeah by the age of 30 or 40 when growth is completed
The
bulk of our energy is spent just in maintaining the body
But it has to function to be maintained and renewed
if you
Have a cast for example on your arm muscles will atrophy because they aren't being used
So just to maintain
What we have we have to be active and that includes
mental or spiritual activity
Keeping a freshness of perspective
This is the
The environmental enrichment and
Yeah
stimulation of everything
Mental processes as well as
Varied physical activity. Do you think there's a place for people to get more?
It's kind of outside the context of this month's show, but I guess a leading question from what you're saying, but in terms of people
Doing things that hopefully they're interested in obviously outside the mundanity of work if they're not interested in that, but they have to do it
but
actively actively engaging and pursuing things that
require them to be mobile and engaging with environment and
Yeah, environmentally enriching them to be a process that is supportive to the organism in terms of
You know producing good
Not just feelings but
Good good good results in terms of feeling fulfilled and that fulfillment
transferring into a mind-body state that's supportive rather than degenerative and
Reductive, you know, it always has to involve newness and invention
Even conversations can be relatively athletic
Okay, are you listening to ask you that herb doctor on Kamedi garble 91.1 FM and from 730 until the end of the show
8 o'clock you invited to call in the number to reach us here is 7 0 7 9 2 3 3 9 1 1 and
I just got to ask the engineer actually that the clock is missing. There is worse happen to the clock. I
Didn't actually go check in there to make sure the clock was there. It's actually not here
I suppose we should put that on our checklist. Well, not a bad idea
I'll start like going like that when you get towards the end and I'll start doing the music very quietly
I just want to make sure that we pay no attention
The musical get loud and little just want to make sure that we have timely intervals remind people
Well, I will I will say opens I will open the lines for calls that have passed. How about that? Sure. Okay
So dr. Peat carrying on about tryptophan now
You've always mentioned that this should be in balance and that's why you've always talked about gelatin gelatin rich products because it's in
The muscle meats where we get the greatest proportion of tryptophan and that would be
You know consuming excess amounts of muscle meats and I think you've don't
Rate more than four ounces or six ounces
As being beneficial for us because of the tryptophan content
Yeah, so
It's I guess it's possible
to
to avoid and again, this is kind of a little bit off topic, but I was
looked at a program that was
About plant-based and I don't want to get into a discussion necessarily about plant-based
Versus animal based proteins, but it was quite an interesting documentary about and I think they followed
Several people maybe four or five
Quote unquote athletes obviously because I think they're at the top of their game
but these people were either vegan or just basically got all of their protein from non animal sources as all plant-based proteins and
They you and McGregor actually was that I don't have to know him, of course, but he's like an MMA fighter
and he was at the top of his game and he was
fighting a title bout that was gonna challenge him for his title and
The chap that Reeves fighting was a vegan and in the interview McGregor was really castigating him and saying that he was
You know just a plant eating, you know, whatever. He was weak and he was gonna destroy him in the fight and
McGregor lost and it was such a shock in the circle because he was at the top of his game and
They proved they were doing this physiologically showing that meat consumption. I'm not anti meat at all
You know
But they were showing that a consumption of meat
Actually slowed the organism down and it actually I know you've mentioned things like cadaverine and putrescene as being byproducts of meat
And definitely which is why you advocate not hanging meat
you know like they do in England perhaps or hang pheasants until they start falling apart and same with their you know, the
Venison, but anyway getting getting back to this title fight
They said that they showed physiologically how it was slowing him down and how his muscles were not able to
repolarize reactors repair as quickly and recover as quickly and they were saying that it was pretty much based on his diet and they
were really
They were really putting meat consumption down, but I don't know if I think the highest phosphate content
Relative right the calcium is a big part of that
Wastes the energy it's like a constant subliminal stimulus
Tend to tend to load the cells up with calcium
as if they were
fatigued already
Honey, would you would you be supportive of a plant-based protein diet over getting any kind of meats?
Because I know you've you know, you're really
You stand very strongly behind gelatin and well, the problem is that a lot of the plant-based proteins are either
Overloaded with phosphate the same as meat or or they have potential allergens and
Offensive molecules that the plants are right have that no no animal has right so you just you still advocate
very simple amino acid type
Gelatin protein sources and then obviously things from dairy
Cheese milk and eggs is good quality clean proteins
Yeah, but it's a tremendously important field for research to
find what plants
Have the proper
Nutrients and don't have the toxins right so that you say you
they nearly always see the conjugated with the oil was a liquid or so that you know polyunsaturates from the nuts and
Yeah, then there's other sources obviously tofu and soy soy protein has been
Implicated with having kind of estrogenic effects
Yeah, okay, all right, so
anyway, so getting back to
Getting back to what we were talking about with tryptophan and serotonin
I wanted to ask about and this will be this will branch out a little bit later into
insulin
resistance
and
Cholesterol production and
Yeah, kind of just go in a few different directions
But I try and keep it as focused as possible that superoxide dismutase
Then this is an enzyme that degrades superoxide and superoxide sold
you know as a health food supplement and
It's an extreme oxidant, correct
Yes, and so and so very damaging and I know last month I asked you just to
break down the oxidation
antioxidation
Kind of concept because we're bombarded with these
And obviously vitamin C is an antioxidant and we know vitamin C is very good. But there's also antioxidant effects that are not
necessarily positive correct oh
Yeah
too much of an antioxidant of
It's typical cancer metabolism for example, right?
Okay, so then that cancer metabolism is a lactic acid producing
Physiology
Yeah as a byproduct
Okay. All right. So
Let's move on then to talk about proteins in terms of muscle building and that kind of thing. But
Most proteins contain tryptophan then which is converted to serotonin
And do you think it's possible to contain enough non tryptophan containing proteins for continued muscle growth and repair?
All of the proteins other than gelatin that I know of
Will support proper growth and repair, right? Okay. All right, it's very straightforward then. All right, and then
Let's have a look here
I wanted to ask you about the pH of the blood and I know there are people
Where especially on the internet if you're looking for any kind of guidelines for health or health related topics
they'll talk about acidity and
alkalinity and
I know the pH of the blood is kept very tightly between
seven point three five and seven point four five I think
How much can this change I mean it's not really possible for that to change is it oh, yeah, I've seen
Very sick people with extremely high
blood pH
Seven point five or six for example, really? Okay, it's a can go outside that range
I thought the body did everything it can to keep it
It does a person has to get really sick for the blood to change
Outside that range. Okay, and and you can do it
momentarily just by hyperventilating
Blowing breathing so fast that your
Carbon dioxide is being lost and
That can push your your blood pH very high to the point that you
Might faint or die
When you lose too much co2 the increased pH tends to cause
Spasms including blood vessel spasms cutting off the circulation of your brain
Can you do the opposite of that because I know you're
an advocate of
increasing co2
Rebreathing in a paper bag, for example, you can correct out and forward the pH of your blood
To the to the point that it can start weakening your muscles and causing too much vessel dilation
So it is possible to go the other direction equally and oppositely
Yeah, muscle weakness is the worst thing
All right, there's nothing too much more serious than that because I know some people were
really really getting into co2 baths and
rebreathing co2 is a kind of
Yeah, if you're just soaking it in through your skin
Since you're breathing in the ordinary air
Even though you're absorbing a really large amount of it through your skin it's going to
Equalize with the air and so you can't overdose sitting in pure co2
All right
Can I want to move on again just to reiterate this for some people perhaps? I'm not too sure
The connection was made quite as clearly as this but I was looking at
I was looking at some articles today just going through some material to see what else could be fleshed out with this evening's
talk carrying on from last month, but
Statins are we I'm gonna get one about statins again, but just just to mention again that the brain
Actually creates its own cholesterol and
cholesterol
Systemically is too big a molecule to get across the blood-brain barrier
and I know I asked you last month about the blood-brain barrier and how
Physiologically intact it was and I know that you mentioned several
Several components that wouldn't typically get across a blood-brain barrier could in certain instances and I think a little bit like the intestinal
barrier
Fairly large fats can massively go into the brain
Well they came from the blood
Interesting, okay, so you say fat some fairly large fats, but you don't think that cholesterol will pass the blood-brain barrier D
Yeah, I think it can
Wow
Okay, because I what I wanted to say was that in so far as the literature is concerned
I'm not saying the literature has it right and you don't but so far as the literature is concerned
That that molecules they say is too big to get across the blood-brain barrier and and hence
Whatever the biological reason for however long we've been around the brain
Because it is such a both energy
Hungry or organ and because the white matter of the brain is principally cholesterol
they say that 20% of the body's cholesterol is actually in the brain and presumably because of the white matter and
presumably because of the
Insulating effect of cholesterol on the neurons and that
the enzyme
HMG Co a reductase
Produces
cholesterol and
Statins for those people unfortunately who might be using them
But hopefully they'll look to an alternative if they don't completely ban them, but they probably won't because they're making too much money from it
This the statins do pass and cross into the blood-brain barrier, so I
Imagine what they do to the brain is what they do to the muscles and if you're
soaked in
statins and
do vigorous exercise the
Interference with cholesterol can cause your muscle to break down and simply dissolve and disintegrate
And I'm afraid that same thing can happen in the brain accounting for the
depression
Suicidality and such right because they're saying they're saying that these are some of the common side effects that they advertise as part of their
disclaimer for the products that
but just to bring out again from a kind of a simplistic maybe mechanistic point that
The fact that you have this stacking crossing into the brain and actually lowering your brains brains cholesterol
Is a definite reason of cause for concern because typically?
If you had a low cholesterol situation, which was not actually
You know due to
Just an inherently high
Genetic reason for producing cholesterol that if you start lowering it systemically
And this is crossing into your brain and your brain is suffering as a result of this you're going to get some very
very odd neurological
side effects of it
the old brain is sort of like a
clump of atherosclerosis
it's a
lots of cholesterol, but it's bound to fatty acids and
In in the old brain free cholesterol is actually lower than in the young brain. It's the bound up
Interfering type of cholesterol that accumulates in the aged brain as in the aged blood vessels
Hmm, but your brain is not like that is it?
Avoiding vegetable oils
Good all right you're listening to I have no idea what time it is, but you're okay there
You go you're listening to ask your doctor came you de Galvo 91.1 FM and from now on to 8 o'clock
You're invited to call him the questions dr. Raymond Peat
Is our guest and the number if you live in the areas or if you even if you don't live out in the area if you?
Live anywhere on the planet. It's seven zero seven nine two three three nine one one
I
Looked at and to be your counting okay. It's expecting the phone to start ringing okay, so I was looking at some some
Some articles this afternoon. I saw an article about hand cellular, which you mentioned
Quite a lot saying that he was doing work on muscular dystrophy
And by administering serotonin to animals this was this was caused he actually gave that he could precipitate
muscular dystrophy in animals
Um yeah, and
that was in the late 50s and early 60s that he was doing those experiments and
Despite that being in the literature
in the 70s
Tryptophan supplements became a popular fad and there was a lot of
Sickness produced by it
I
think there were
mental problems, but
muscle inflammation and an immune
problem
was the
Focus of the disease that became
Well known and the FDA blamed it on on a bad
type of
tryptophan that they never explained, but
Hansell you was producing it with
tryptophan simply in excess
Okay, all right. We have a we have a caller on the on the line, so let's take this caller call away from what's your question?
Hi, good evening. I'm calling from Santa Barbara, California. Hi welcome to show
Thank you. I just have a question are you familiar with the hair tissue mineral analysis test?
Yep, don't say yeah
Okay, great. I just had some results of that and my first question was is I have a very high
sodium to potassium
potassium ratio my my
Sodium is
34 and my potassium is one. I just wanted to know what could be causing that and
What do you do about it? What's a hair analysis? Yeah
It could be that you
Have hard water or have a water softener that puts sodium into the water
Yes, Santa Barbara has water softeners in lots of the houses
Do you have do you have a water softener in your house? Yes, I do
Yeah, okay, that puts sodium into the water and so it will skew the hair test
Okay
and then just one more on those I
Have a the ratio between the calcium and the potassium is
It very skewed as well. My calcium is 46 and the potassium is one
I
I'm not sure that that
could be from hard water rather than softened water, but I wouldn't worry about a
Hair mineral test a serum test is much more useful
Right. Yeah, there you go. It's basically anything that you're exposed to that
Dr. Peat mentioned in the first instance here if you're showering and your water has been
Softened that way then that could easily explain how the hair would take up those components and would show to be
High in one and low in another but obviously blood tests are the best way to do it
Okay, did you have any particular reason for testing your hair or was this just a curiosity?
No, yeah, I am working like with a
functional
nutritionist and I've
Had the Dutch hormone testing done previously and I've had some
Stool sampling done and so as we progress kind of trying to figure out the puzzle pieces of my symptoms
This was another
This test was recommended by her. Yeah, do you feel like you want to talk about what it was?
You were looking for help for or oh sure. Yeah, I
basically a couple years ago I started having symptoms of
Hypoglycemia, which I still have now and how old you I'm 46. Okay, go carry on
Yeah, so I've had that I've had
Basically increased weight gain during these last couple years. I've gained probably about 40 pounds
I have changed my diet
Significantly that was obviously a big problem for me. But my my diet is very
I follow a lot of dr. Peat's recommendations my
my practitioner follows his work, so
I've in you know done a lot of those changes and everything, but
Basically, I have like hypoglycemia. I have problems with anxiety
My inflammation marker is very high
And then like I said the weight gain and my
hormones
Indicate I have high cortisol
So those are all kind of things that we've been trying to work on
Okay, Dr. Peat hypoglycemia with high cortisol and weight gain and anxiety and anxiety
And calcium and and thyroid are
likely involved vitamin D calcium and thyroid
Have you have you had your vitamin D measured?
Do you know what that is?
Yes, the most recent one I've had done. I want to say it was around
50 ish
Then
amount of calcium in your diet
works with both
Thyroid and vitamin D to keep your metabolic rate up and your blood sugar steady
Okay
To two grams a day of calcium is it's a good level
Do you drink any milk or do you take a calcium supplement or?
I don't take a calcium supplement, but I do drink milk, and I do eat high quality dairy. How much milk do you drink?
I
Was well I've increased that
Per dr. Peat so I mean for me probably about 16 ounces, and I'm drinking
2% milk yeah, I think twice that much of 1% would be better
Took two quarts of what skimmed or 1% helps to lose weight because of the high calcium content
and you said
About like there. What did you say on the ounces?
From 1 to 2 quarts
Okay, 1 to 2 quarts of okay
Okay
That tends to increase your temperature and if your temperature doesn't
Rise quickly in the morning when you get up and eat breakfast if it doesn't get up to 98.6
by
half hour after breakfast
But then you're likely to need a thyroid supplement, too
Yeah, I do. I do the temperatures and pulses and I tend to have low temperatures
And then I did I did try
some nature throid
a very like of the like the lowest dosage I forget the like quarter grain or
Something like that, but I started having
More negative effects with it
I started having like my anxiety was more increased and I started having like more aggressive
Like behavior like a real short fuse and that kind of stuff so I quit taking that after about a month
One of the effects of
thyroid is to make your cells able to retain the magnesium that they need and
If your diet doesn't have enough magnesium
And two quarts of milk would give you a generous supply of magnesium
which would make the
thyroid able to work more quickly and
The normal function of thyroid is to increase your ability to relax both both muscles and nerves
Okay
Okay, I appreciate your time. Thank you both so much. Yeah, you're welcome
Okay, so people want to call in numbers seven zero seven nine two three three nine one one dr. Raymond Peat's with us in the studio
Okay
so dr. Peat
going back to the
Going back to positive effects, and we've mentioned it's positive. It's only ever positive, but it's demonized
in the industry in terms of treatments for lowering it
cholesterols effect is
Undoubtable in terms of regulating
regulating the system regulating and supporting and stabilizing cells
Let me just okay. There's a call on the line
Let's get this caller before we jump into this next question caller you're on the airway from
I'm from Mendocino County. Okay. Hi. What's your question?
My question is from recently diagnosed with osteoporosis, and I was wondering an alternative way to treat that yeah
How old are you?
62 62 okay, there's plenty of good plenty of good ways to do this, but let dr. P
Let Dr. Peat discuss it. Go ahead Dr. Peat. Okay keeping keeping the parathyroid hormone
under control is
essential and
Eating a lot of calcium
like two quarts of milk and keeping your your
vitamin D serum level up to the middle of the range like 50 mg per ml
That
Is a good basis, but if your thyroid
Hormone is low
Then your your prolactin
Will likely be high enough that the prolactin itself as a bone weakening effect
Prolactin is normally the hormone of lactation
And it takes calcium out of the bone
normally to put into the milk but
under stress it causes
calcium to be lost from the bone and
Prolactin tends to rise along with thyroid stimulating hormone and
The
simplest way to normalize prolactin is to normalize your thyroid function keep
Keep your thyroid stimulating hormone
At the lower end of the normal range
Okay, how do you keep the thyroid how do you do that um if you can't do it just with a selection of foods
then a supplement
A thyroid supplement, yeah
Yeah, and I do not like milk so is there something else that I could do to get calcium oh?
Well cooked greens are
Food that's richest other than milk and calcium relative to phosphate
but
if you grind up eggshells
That's a good pure form of calcium carbonate which is next best to milk
Okay, how much how many ground-up egg cells that you do per day? Oh?
A couple of grams would be good
Okay
Yeah, so you can just use your eggs if you use eggs you can just put them to one side and
Gently wash out the membrane and stack them up for a week or so and then after a week you can put them on a
Baking tray and put them in the oven at about 150
and
Basically sterilize sterilize them that way and then put them in a coffee grinder, and then they'll grind up very finely into a fine powder
Do have some people who use these?
Kind of approaches to calcium rather than pills and capsules that do say that and best taken with food
Can irritate some people's stomachs, but it's a very clean way especially if we're using organic eggs
To get a good quality calcium carbonate, and it's almost all calcium so
2,000 milligrams a day is what dr.
Peat said so two grams it's about it's about three one eighth teaspoons
I think I think an eighth teaspoon is 650 odd milligrams
Okay, yeah, so if you don't drink milk or eat cheese or get lots of cooked greens, and you are calcium
Calcium lean then that's obviously gonna work against you, but can I quickly ask you what kind of menstrual history you had I?
Had I went to menopause at early age at 45 45. Yeah, all right
I just spoken to a lot of women who have
Either had hysterectomies and very poor hormone replacement
Approaches done or have had really bad menstrual cycles and been very high estrogen and a lot of these women show very
early
Osteopenia I mean in their 40s and in osteo
bordering osteoporotic by 50 it's not what you want you really want to address this and vitamin D and
Calcium and thyroid are going to be the best least invasive and certainly most tolerable
approach to dealing with your osteoporosis because you're only young and
You know hopefully you're gonna live quite a while longer, and it's gonna
It's not gonna get any better if you don't address it
unopposed cortisol
other bone dissolving
What is that?
cortisol
If it's even in the higher part of the normal range in a morning test
if it isn't balanced with the
adrenal
DHEA and progesterone and other adrenal
steroids
that can can contribute to
osteoporosis and
supplementing
progesterone and DHEA
and or pregnenolone
Can oppose that effective cortisol?
Okay, all right. Thank you very much. Dr.. Peat
Okay, good, so the number if you live anywhere on the planet, and he's like to ask dr.
Peat a question during this evening's call
Ending at 8 o'clock here with seven zero seven nine two three three nine one
seven zero seven nine two three three nine one one
So dr. Peat just getting back to cholesterol for a little bit
in terms of what has been so popularized and so treated with statins
Cholesterol's positive effects. I think are just beginning to come to pass you know and I think it's a little bit like a sea change that's
occurred with the
whole perpetration of
Polyunsaturated supposedly being good for you and saturated fats being bad for you, which is I think now at last
finally seeing the light of day and
I'm reading reports on the internet. I'm not saying the internet is the only sole source of any information, but
Seeing some good articles coming out about how that is just so and he's been talking about it for 40 years or more
I'm sorry that it's taken
So long for everybody you know including us ten years ago is still thinking that helps the way it was but I'm
Also starting to see some good articles that have been written
Expounding the benefits of cholesterol and just outlining in very plain simple layman terms
Just how beneficial cholesterol is and why it's so important and that the whole LDL HDL
Thing is a complete myth, and they're actually a lot more studies showing that some of these oxidized LTL particles
They're probably more responsible for the inflammatory
initial insult on the endothelia of the vessels that then causes
Cholesterol to be laid down as a repair mechanism which during dissection of a cadaver who's died of a heart attack for example
They'll say oh, that's it. They say here. I is a cholesterol. It's blocked the arteries
That's why he's dead when actually all the time you and you boy said it's the initial insult from things like lipofluxin or other
oxidative byproducts of lipid metabolism that have caused initial insult
But in terms of the brain and the brains functioning
so cholesterol
I can't we can't really can't really state it enough. Just how important it is to have
adequate cholesterol and that low cholesterol is
virtually unspoken about people you find it very hard to find any information regarding low cholesterol because no one's looking that way and
I wonder just how many people
Actually present with a blood test and their doctors saying oh your cholesterol is great
You know whenever I've had blood work done and my cholesterol is played
120 at the moment
It's always wow your cholesterol is great, and I'm thinking no. It's not it's nowhere near high enough
You know and I know you've always said that you should be about 200 so a cholesterol of 120 is obviously not good for me
But yeah, it's not at all influenced by diet and in terms of your body will make cholesterol out of just about anything
Yeah
Okay, there's a caller on the end. Let's get this caller. I call you. Yeah, where you from what's my name is John and
I'm 78 over the last
Year or maybe a little more I guess my PFA's gone up, okay precipitously yeah
from four to five to
20 okay
And I wonder if there's any supplements that can help me drive that down. Yeah
Talks P. It's probably not in isolation for this, but this person's PSA
is 20 now
Um I think everything
Anti-inflammatory is the right approach
a diet
Low in phosphate is a very basic anti-inflammatory thing
And so on
The
Cooked cooked greens cheese milk and eggs are
anti-inflammatory foods
Keeping your thyroid function up so that your
Your liver is helping to balance your hormones keeping estrogen down
Adequate protein a good calcium phosphate ratio and
Fairly
High normal a body temperature is important
Lower inflammation and keep the ratio of estrogen low
Do you think dr. Peat from my from an herb herbal medicine perspective the kind of rationale of using aromatase
inhibitors from things like nettle root or using the sterols
Probably from saw palmetto might be
anti-estrogenic and that's how
that could be a rationale for treating high
Prostate hypertrophy if you do you think I prostrate hypertrophy is down to estrogens as much as anything else yeah
Estrogen love
It's a growth and carcinogenic
factor
In the prostate right and as men get older their estrogen no doubt rises especially as testosterone is on the decline
Yeah, and the men who live the longest with prostate cancer have the highest testosterone
What?
The men that live the longest yeah with prostate cancer have the highest testosterone
Yeah, so in that okay?
Yeah, so that the testosterone that in that point then it's kind of protective huh yeah
And in the early 90s
when
They started using the PSA test as a diagnosis of prostate cancer
the
Mortality from prostate cancer
took a huge surge upward
and
Some of the doctors noticed that and decided maybe it wasn't a good idea to diagnose prostate cancer
Right because a lot of the times you have said this quite a few times before now
But a lot of the times it can not advocating people just don't do anything about a supposed cancer marker
That is you know possibly
treatable especially from a medical perspective
but
You've mentioned quite a few times that people
found
In in the mortuary they've just died from some other cause and they've been found with a wide range of different cancers that hasn't been the
Thing that's killed them or they've been found with prostate
enlargement and or you know benign type dysplastic prostatic inflammation a couple studies found that a hundred percent of
people who died at the age of 50 or more
All of them had diagnosable cancer some right yeah
Yeah, so the the the call a the the best thing the best things for you
Talking about what dr. Peat's been mentioning if you can obviously
maintain physical activity
In terms of keeping a testosterone as high as you can from being a male that's certainly very protective and anti estrogenic
estrogen being one of those
Hormones that rises in males especially in males that are obese or you know they have more fat than is good for them
Especially because of that tissue tends to accumulate and or produce estrogen in its own right and then there are two
Herbs that I know there's more than that
But the two that come to mind instantly are things like nettle root as an aromatase inhibitor
And that has an effect blocking estrogen and then the saw palmetto extract, but there's lots of there's lots of information about
alternative medicines for
enlarged prostate
but I think obviously keeping an eye on your your PSA in conjunction with using some of those herbs that have been used for
prostatic enlargement and
Making sure that your estrogen is being opposed by testosterone and getting exercise and aspirin
There you go and aspirin certainly something that's very well tolerated very inexpensive and very easily to get hold of
Okay, we do have one more caller on the air, so let's get this next caller call it you're on the airway from them
What's your question? I'm in Humboldt and Redway, okay?
My question is how can I get off selexa?
Okay, we had we had a very similar question last month about a lady who called in
on SSRIs and wanted wanted help with that so
In terms of in terms of a dose have you ever tried reducing the dose of this and then?
slowly withdrawing from it
I would be willing to try that yeah
It's one. I mean Dr. Peat in terms of withdrawing we've we talked about this last month so in terms of withdrawing
From an SSRI it's not to be done
unsupported, but you mentioned last month that there's
Plenty to do in terms of support in the physiology with thyroid
with other you know positive lifestyle diet changes that
basically will allow a person to slowly taper off of an SSRI and not be
Not be basically overloaded with this this product serotonin one of their effects
tends to
increase the stress hormones and so an
anti-stress program
I've known people to withdraw from
several different
addictive things including the SSRIs
using progesterone and coffee and
thyroid and a good
high calcium diet for example
How long have you been using it for?
Many years yeah, yeah, I mean obviously it's
It's unfortunate. We're getting so close to the top of the hour and the end of the show but in terms of
It's used for the treatment of anxiety and depression etc etc and all the label recommendations that are given for prescribing it in the first place
in terms of your headspace and
Where you are and what you engage with what stimulates you or what or what you know upsets you even?
there's certainly
Scope there for
You know lifestyle changes, but as dr.
Peat's mentioned you know in terms of anti-stress things there are certainly components that in your diet are
anti-stress and that support your thyroid and are anti-inflammatory and
Decrease the quote-unquote stress which is on you know
Like lifestyle changes that like go out and run or walk in a day. No. We're not running for sure but in terms of
Gentle weight-bearing exercise and walking and reading and being in the sunlight
You know or in a bright room making sure you've got exposure to that good red light etc etc especially in the winter now
We're coming with a long day long nights and short days and the whole
seasonal affective disorder being a fairly widespread thing in this part of the world as
Thyroid gets low as the winter's coming
This thyroid hormone, and then there's opposing your estrogen as a female which undoubtedly will have a beneficial effect
Keeping up vitamin D. Yeah
Hormone replacement therapy
No, not a big
Good of hormone replacement therapy well the only hormone would be progesterone to oppose your estrogen that
If you're on any kind of hormone replacement, that's estrogen based, and you really don't want to be doing that
It's it's completely not what you're gonna hear from your doctor perhaps you know or maybe some
naturopath who's a little more
current
Mm-hmm yeah, I don't even have a clock in front of me. What what time is it Michael I?
Guess it's that time. I'm afraid we got a little music where you yeah, I mean you've got a minute to say goodbye to dr.
Yeah, all right. Thank you so much dr. Peat for joining us
Okay, if that lady wants to contact us any any time afterwards basically you can just email me my email address is Andrew at Western
botanical medicine comm
So yeah, go ahead and email me. I'll respond to your email next week. I want to get back in the office on Monday
Okay, so for those who've listened. Thanks for joining in the show
the same third Friday of next month December and
For those people who've listened to dr. Peat I want to find out more about him
www.raypeat.com
I've got plenty of well-written articles that fully backed up by
Studies that you can just go ahead and look at on the internet so people want alternatives. They want some hope
definitely a good thing to have and
Very positive there's lots of alternatives, so don't have to be forced down one particular way to do something anyway until
Next month. Oh, I just wanted to mention that in January
Sarah will be back
For all those people all those people who keep saying where's Sarah where's Sarah anyway? Thanks so much for joining until next month